docs: provide hardware recommendations for reference architectures (#12534)
coder/coder: docs/admin/architectures/index.md

# Reference Architectures

This document provides prescriptive solutions and reference architectures to

> support successful deployments of up to 2000 users and outlines at a high-level

Reviewer: Since we have the 3k doc..?

```suggestion
support successful deployments of up to 3000 users and outlines at a high-level
```

| Web Terminal (PTY)   |     | X   | X   | X   | X   |     |     |
| Workspace apps       |     |     | X   | X   | X   | X   |     |
| Dashboard (headless) |     |     |     | X   | X   | X   | X   |

This pattern closely reflects how our customers naturally use the system. SSH
connections are heavily utilized because they're the primary communication
channel for IDEs with VS Code and JetBrains plugins.

The basic setup of scale tests environment involves:

1. Scale tests runner (32 vCPU, 128 GB RAM)
2. Coder: 2 replicas (4 vCPU, 16 GB RAM)
3. Database: 1 instance (2 vCPU, 32 GB RAM)
4. Provisioner: 50 instances (0.5 vCPU, 512 MB RAM)

The test is deemed successful if users did not experience interruptions in their
workflows, `coderd` did not crash or require restarts, and no other internal
errors were observed.

### Traffic Projections

In our scale tests, we simulate activity from 2000 users, 2000 workspaces, and
2000 agents, with two items of workspace agent metadata being sent every 10
seconds. Here are the resulting metrics:

Coder:

- Median CPU usage for _coderd_: 3 vCPU, peaking at 3.7 vCPU during dashboard

>   tests.

Reviewer: `s/during dashboard tests/while all tests are running concurrently/`.

- Median API request rate: 350 RPS during dashboard tests, 250 RPS during Web
  Terminal and workspace apps tests.
- 2000 agent API connections with latency: p90 at 60 ms, p95 at 220 ms.
- on average 2400 Web Socket connections during dashboard tests.

Provisionerd:

- Median CPU usage is 0.35 vCPU during workspace provisioning.

Database:

> - Median CPU utilization is 80%, with a significant portion dedicated to writing
>   metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Median CPU utilization is 80%, with a significant portion dedicated to writing
  workspace agent metadata.
```

### Control plane: coderd

To ensure stability and reliability of the Coder control plane, it's essential
to focus on node sizing, resource limits, and the number of replicas. We
recommend referencing public cloud providers such as AWS, GCP, and Azure for
guidance on optimal configurations. A reasonable approach involves using scaling
formulas based on factors like CPU, memory, and the number of users.

While the minimum requirements specify 1 CPU core and 2 GB of memory per
`coderd` replica, it is recommended to allocate additional resources depending
on the workload size to ensure deployment stability.

#### CPU and memory usage

Enabling [agent stats collection](../../cli.md#--prometheus-collect-agent-stats)
(optional) may increase memory consumption.

Enabling direct connections between users and workspace agents (apps or SSH
traffic) can help prevent an increase in CPU usage. It is recommended to keep
[this option enabled](../../cli.md#--disable-direct-connections) unless there
are compelling reasons to disable it.

Inactive users do not consume Coder resources.

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, consider the following factors:

> - `1 vCPU x 2 GB memory x 250 users`: A reasonable formula to determine resource

Reviewer: I think this better matches our reference arch?

```suggestion
- `0.5 vCPU x 2 GB memory x 250 users`: A reasonable formula to determine resource
```

Author: Thinking about the future, I would leave `1 vCPU`, WDYT?

Reviewer 2: We can probably argue for wiggle room here based on how certain Terraform providers may be more CPU-intensive than others.

  allocation based on the number of users and their expected usage patterns.
- API latency/response time: Monitor API latency and response times to ensure
  optimal performance under varying loads.
- Average number of HTTP requests: Track the average number of HTTP requests to

>   gauge system usage and identify potential bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  gauge system usage and identify potential bottlenecks.
- The number of proxied connections: For a very high number of proxied
  connections, more memory is required.
```

onboard, the autoscaling configuration should account for ongoing workspaces.

Scaling down workspace nodes to zero is not recommended, as it will result in
longer wait times for workspace provisioning by users. However, this may be
necessary for workspaces with special resource requirements (e.g. GPUs) that
incur significant cost overheads.

### Data plane: External database

While running in production, Coder requires a access to an external PostgreSQL
database. Depending on the scale of the user-base, workspace activity, and High
Availability requirements, the amount of CPU and memory resources required by
Coder's database may differ.

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, take into account the following
considerations:

- `2 vCPU x 8 GB RAM x 512 GB storage`: A baseline for database requirements for
  Coder deployment with less than 1000 users, and low activity level (30% active
  users). This capacity should be sufficient to support 100 external
  provisioners.
- Storage size depends on user activity, workspace builds, log verbosity,
  overhead on database encryption, etc.
- Allocate an additional CPU core to the database instance for every 1000 active

>   users.

Reviewer: I would say two additional cores for every 1000 active user. 2k workspaces can produce 80% load on a 8 vCPU database (given that metadata is used).

Author: Yeah, actually you're right

- Enable _High Availability_ mode for database engine for large scale
  deployments.

If you enable [database encryption](../encryption.md) in Coder, consider
allocating an additional CPU core to every `coderd` replica.

#### Performance optimization guidelines

We provide the following general recommendations for PostgreSQL settings:

> - Increase number of vCPU if CPU utilization or database latency is high.

Reviewer: Higher IOPS storage is also another solid strategy to reduce DB load.

Author: Rephrased the point about disks.

- Allocate extra memory if database performance is poor and CPU utilization is
  low. For maximum performance, the entire database should be able to fit in

>   RAM.

Reviewer: I think we may want to drop the "fit in to RAM" statement, as it isn't necessarily true, fast storage can be just as good (if not better).

Perhaps better would be to simply state that "if memory utilization is high, and cpu low, then more RAM".

Reviewer 2: Yep, good point.

    project builds or load tests.
  - Evaluate minimal limits for single workspace. Include in the calculation
    requirements for Coder agent running in an idle workspace - 0.1 vCPU and 256
    MB. For instance, developers can choose between 0.5-8 vCPUs, and 1-16 GB
    memory.

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, consider the following factors:

- `1 vCPU x 2 GB memory x 1 workspace`: A formula to determine resource
  allocation based on the minimal requirements for an idle workspace with a
  running Coder agent and occasional CPU and memory bursts for building
  projects.

**Node Autoscaling**

Workspace nodes can be set to operate in autoscaling mode to mitigate the risk
of prolonged high resource utilization.

One approach is to scale up workspace nodes when total CPU usage or memory
consumption reaches 80%. Another option is to scale based on metrics such as the
number of workspaces or active users. It's important to note that as new users
onboard, the autoscaling configuration should account for ongoing workspaces.

Scaling down workspace nodes to zero is not recommended, as it will result in
longer wait times for workspace provisioning by users.

> ### Database

Reviewer 3: I imagine the database will also go into the reference architectures?

Author: Yes, this is still a draft PR. I'm working on that part 👍

  metadata.
- Memory utilization averages at 40%.
- `write_ops_count` between 6.7 and 8.4 operations per second.

## Available reference architectures

[Up to 1,000 users](1k-users.md)

[Up to 2,000 users](2k-users.md)

[Up to 3,000 users](3k-users.md)

## Hardware recommendation

### Control plane: coderd

To ensure stability and reliability of the Coder control plane, it's essential
to focus on node sizing, resource limits, and the number of replicas. We
recommend referencing public cloud providers such as AWS, GCP, and Azure for
guidance on optimal configurations. A reasonable approach involves using scaling
formulas based on factors like CPU, memory, and the number of users.

> While the minimum requirements specify 1 CPU core and 2 GB of memory per
> `coderd` replica, it is recommended to allocate additional resources to ensure
> deployment stability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the minimum requirements specify 1 CPU core and 2 GB of memory per
`coderd` replica, it is recommended to allocate additional resources depending
on the workload size to ensure deployment stability.
```

#### CPU and memory usage

> The memory consumption may increase with enabled agent stats collection by the
> Prometheus metrics aggregator (optional).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enabling [agent stats collection](link to docs) (optional) may increase memory consumption.
```

Author: Hm.. I don't see any relevant doc pages? Do you have something in mind?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, CLI was what I meant.

> Enabling direct connections between users and workspace agents (apps or SSH
> traffic) can help prevent an increase in CPU usage. It is recommended to keep
> this option enabled unless there are compelling reasons to disable it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Allowing direct connections between users and workspace agents (apps or SSH
traffic) can help prevent an increase in CPU usage. It is recommended to keep
[this option enabled](link to docs) unless there are compelling reasons to disable it.
```

Author: Same question, do you have something in mind, or should we create a subpage?

Author: Ok, I found it

Reviewer 2: Yep sorry, I meant the docs for the CLI option for coder-server.

Inactive users do not consume Coder resources.

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, consider the following factors:

- `1 vCPU x 2 GB memory x 250 users`: A reasonable formula to determine resource
  allocation based on the number of users and their expected usage patterns.
- API latency/response time: Monitor API latency and response times to ensure
  optimal performance under varying loads.
- Average number of HTTP requests: Track the average number of HTTP requests to
  gauge system usage and identify potential bottlenecks.

**HTTP API latency**

For a reliable Coder deployment dealing with medium to high loads, it's
important that API calls for workspace/template queries and workspace build
operations respond within 300 ms. However, API template insights calls, which
involve browsing workspace agent stats and user activity data, may require more

> time.

Reviewer 2: Might also be good to add a note about long-lived connections

Also, if the Coder deployment expects traffic from developers spread across the
globe, keep in mind that customer-facing latency might be higher because of the

> distance between users and the load balancer.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a note about workspace proxies in this scenario?

**Node Autoscaling**

We recommend disabling the autoscaling for `coderd` nodes. Autoscaling can cause
interruptions for user connections, see [Autoscaling](../scale.md#autoscaling)
for more details.

### Control plane: provisionerd

> Each provisioner can run a single concurrent workspace build. For example,
> running 10 provisioner containers will allow 10 users to start workspaces at the
> same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each external provisioner can run a single concurrent workspace build. For example,
running 10 provisioner containers will allow 10 users to start workspaces at the
same time.
```

> By default, the Coder server runs built-in provisioner daemons, but the
> _Enterprise_ Coder release allows for running external provisioners to separate
> the load caused by workspace provisioning on the `coderd` nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the Coder server runs 3 built-in provisioner daemons, but the
_Enterprise_ Coder release allows for running external provisioners to separate
the load caused by workspace provisioning on the `coderd` nodes.
```

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, consider the following factors:

- `1 vCPU x 1 GB memory x 2 concurrent workspace build`: A formula to determine
  resource allocation based on the number of concurrent workspace builds, and
  standard complexity of a Terraform template. _Rule of thumb_: the more
  provisioners are free/available, the more concurrent workspace builds can be

>   performed.

Reviewer 2: This aligns with my experience; a single provisionerd tends to not go much above 0.1C / 512MB.

Author: Should I decrease these numbers or leave as is?

Reviewer 2: I think you can leave as-is.

**Node Autoscaling**

Autoscaling provisioners is not an easy problem to solve unless it can be
predicted when a number of concurrent workspace builds increases.

We recommend disabling autoscaling and adjusting the number of provisioners to
developer needs based on the workspace build queuing time.

### Data plane: Workspaces

To determine workspace resource limits and keep the best developer experience
for workspace users, administrators must be aware of a few assumptions.

> - Workspace pods run on the same Kubernetes cluster, but possible in a different
>   namespace or a node pool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Workspace pods run on the same Kubernetes cluster, but possibly in a different
  namespace or on a separate set of nodes.
```

- Workspace limits (per workspace user):

>   - Evaluate the workspace utilization pattern. For instance, a regular web
>     development does not require high CPU capacity all the time, but only during
>     project builds or load tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Evaluate the workspace utilization pattern. For instance, web application
    development does not require high CPU capacity at all times, but will spike
    during builds or testing.
```

  - Evaluate minimal limits for single workspace. Include in the calculation
    requirements for Coder agent running in an idle workspace - 0.1 vCPU and 256
    MB. For instance, developers can choose between 0.5-8 vCPUs, and 1-16 GB
    memory.

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, consider the following factors:

- `1 vCPU x 2 GB memory x 1 workspace`: A formula to determine resource
  allocation based on the minimal requirements for an idle workspace with a
  running Coder agent and occasional CPU and memory bursts for building

>   projects.

Author: Could you elaborate more, please? We have this assumption: `0.1 vCPU and 256 MB` for agent, so I left more resources for a "sample" developer.

>   projects.

Reviewer 2: Ah, that makes more sense.

**Node Autoscaling**

Workspace nodes can be set to operate in autoscaling mode to mitigate the risk
of prolonged high resource utilization.

One approach is to scale up workspace nodes when total CPU usage or memory
consumption reaches 80%. Another option is to scale based on metrics such as the
number of workspaces or active users. It's important to note that as new users
onboard, the autoscaling configuration should account for ongoing workspaces.

> Scaling down workspace nodes to zero is not recommended, as it will result in
> longer wait times for workspace provisioning by users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scaling down workspace nodes to zero is not recommended, as it will result in
longer wait times for workspace provisioning by users. However, this may be
necessary for workspaces with special resource requirements (e.g. GPUs) that incur significant cost overheads.
```

### Data plane: External database

> While running in production, Coder deployment requires an access to an external
> PostgreSQL database. Depending on the scale of the user-base, workspace
> activity, and High Availability requirements, the amount of CPU and memory
> resources may differ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While running in production, Coder requires a access to an external
PostgreSQL database. Depending on the scale of the user-base, workspace
activity, and High Availability requirements, the amount of CPU and memory
resources required by Coder's database may differ.
```

#### Scaling formula

When determining scaling requirements, take into account the following
considerations:

- `2 vCPU x 8 GB RAM x 512 GB storage`: A baseline for database requirements for
  Coder deployment with less than 1000 users, and low activity level (30% active
  users). This capacity should be sufficient to support 100 external
  provisioners.
- Storage size depends on user activity, workspace builds, log verbosity,
  overhead on database encryption, etc.
- Allocate an additional CPU core to the database instance for every 1000 active
  users.
- Enable _High Availability_ mode for database engine for large scale
  deployments.

> With enabled database encryption feature in Coder, consider allocating an
> additional CPU core to every `coderd` replica.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you enable [database encryption](link to docs) in Coder, consider allocating an
additional CPU core to every `coderd` replica.
```

#### Performance optimization guidelines

We provide the following general recommendations for PostgreSQL settings:

- Increase number of vCPU if CPU utilization or database latency is high.

> - Allocate extra GB memory if database performance is poor and CPU utilization
>   is low.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allocate extra memory if database performance is poor and CPU utilization
  is low. For maximum performance, the entire database should be able to fit in RAM.
```
